the following content is provided under
a Creative Commons license your support
will help MIT OpenCourseWare continue to
offer high quality educational resources
for free
to make a donation or to view additional
materials from hundreds of MIT courses
visit MIT opencourseware at ocw.mit.edu
so problem set 5 was do now and problem
set 6 is due next week it'll be posted
later today
welcome to the parents we will have
clickers to thank you for coming so
today's topic we're continuing with
chemical equilibrium and depending on
when the clickers come the fun video may
be at the top of the lecture but before
that today is going to be a clicker
competition and hopefully for the
parents in the room your your child has
told you what these clicker competitions
are the parents will be in their own
recitation if you win I think you have
to come back next week for snacks at
recitation so we'll we'll explain that
but some recitations have been doing
very well in the clicker competition but
they have not won so I just want to
share with you another extra credit
clicker assignment and this extra credit
clicker assignment is something you can
do this weekend with your parents so so
again this is optional this is to win
for your recitation extra credit points
to get into the championship at the end
of the semester to win the geeky t-shirt
the geeky t-shirt is itself a prize or
extra credit thing to get in ok
so in class I have been showing science
videos and these are the stars of the
science videos they're MIT undergrads
graduate students postdocs and faculty
and they've been talking about how they
use basic chemical principles in their
research and how that research is
important for addressing a real-world
problem so the extra credit assignment
is that each of these individuals also
has a tutu I think the longest one is
about 5 minutes personal video and and
so the extra credit assignment is to
watch one or all as many as you want of
these personal videos
and then send Elena an email with your
recitation number in the subject line
saying one thing that surprised you in a
personal video are one thing to which
you could really relate that someone
said in their personal video so it can
just be one or two sentences it doesn't
have to be long when I gave this
assignment before I'll give you a little
help and where you might want to start
we had the most comments about a Ben's
personal video and Samuels personal
video and some people also commented on
my personal video so these are personal
videos that kind of tell people's pasts
to science or people's path to chemistry
so I thought this might be a fun thing
to do it's available online here you
could watch some of these again two to
five minutes with your parents and and
that might also help your parents
understand a little about the people who
are here at MIT so this is something and
it's due November 3rd but I thought it
might be a fun thing I do homework with
their parents on visiting weekend that's
an awesome thing to be able to do all
right
so clicker competition recitations 7:00
Dan must unseat him here's one that
parents might know the answer to we'll
see and again you can you can share but
remember your parents are competing
against you
alright let's just try 10 more seconds
oh very good
so that's the answer so that was
yesterday and so this every year it's
national chemistry week on the week of
mole day so this is national chemistry
week so if I can get most the way
through lecture I'm going to share with
you a fun video at the end that
celebrates national chemistry week so
hopefully we'll get there but first
let's talk a little bit about chemical
equilibrium the subject for today so
chemical equilibrium it's all about
staying calm so we want the rate in to
be equal to the rate out we like to be
at this equilibrium place but sometimes
often all the time frankly all the time
stress is applied to our equilibrium
situation and systems must respond in
such a way to alleviate that stress
soulish at liaison cEPAL suggests that
when a stress is applied to the system
the system will respond in such a way to
minimize the stress again this is about
keeping calm minimizing stress and if
you think about what direction the
reaction will go to minimize the stress
you can predict the direction of the
reaction so today we're going to talk
about some of the stresses to the system
last time we talked about adding and
removing reactants and products this
time we're going to talk about gases and
we're gonna talk about changing the
volume that's our first stress to the
system so if you decrease the volume of
gaseous system it'll cause an increase
in the total pressure and we know this
from the ideal gas law and other
relationships also between pressure and
volume so the ideal gas law is something
most MIT students are familiar with
because it is in fact the T in MIT so PV
equals NRT where P is pressure V is
volume T is temperature n is the number
of moles of that ideal gas and
ours are ideal gas constant so this
relates pressure to volume at a constant
temperature and relates pressure volume
and temperature and also number of moles
to each other so this is a very
important expression and we won't
actually be talking very much about the
ideal gas law but you need it in this
unit because in this unit we're thinking
about stresses to equilibrium situations
and how reactions are going to respond
so if you decrease the volume of a
gaseous system causing an increase in
total pressure the system is going to
respond in such a way to minimize the
stress or decrease the total pressure
and so the chatelier's principle would
predict that if possible that system is
going to respond in such a way to reduce
that total pressure so you increase the
pressure reduce the pressure minimize
the stress so let's look at a reaction
of gas to another gas so here we have
two molecules of gas p2 going to one
molecule of p4 and if we had a container
with a particular volume and we compress
that volume the reaction that is at
equilibrium is going to respond and here
a decrease in volume is going to shift
the reaction toward product so why is
this why is it gonna shift it toward
product and it's because for every two
molecules of p2 that are consumed only
one molecule of p4 is formed and thus
you this shift toward product shift
toward p4 is going to reduce the total
pressure because you have fewer
molecules of gas so each of them is a
little bit happier in this now a
decreased volume so you can also just
think about what direction where the
moles and how this is shifting but you
can also think about this in terms of Q
and K and I highly recommend this
I'm a big fan of thinking about the
relationship between Q and K so let's
think about this now let's just suppose
that the volume is decreased by a factor
of two so he was we were at equilibrium
Q was equal to K K is the equilibrium
constant or the reaction quotient at
equilibrium but now we have changed the
volume by two so we can think about what
has happened to Q so Q is products over
reactants at any time point product is
the partial pressure of gas P 4 that's
our product over the partial pressure of
the reactants the partial pressure of P
2 gas but they're two of them so we have
to remember the stoichiometry of the
reaction so both of these are affected
but because of the stoichiometry of the
reaction Q is now a half so Q has
changed we have decreased Q by a factor
of two so Q is now less than K so tell
me what happens to Delta G in this
situation
let's try just 10 more seconds
yep so it is a negative value and let's
take a look at why so Delta G is
negative and we recall this relationship
the Delta G RT natural log of Q over K
so when Q is less than K you get a
negative value for Delta G and when you
have a negative value for Delta G the
reaction goes in the forward direction
so a negative value for Delta G means
it's spontaneous in the forward
direction the forward Direction is
toward products and this will happen
until Q equals K again so you can think
about this based on the equation and
always ask yourself is Q changing is few
less than K or greater than K and
that'll predict the direction to which
the reaction will switch so it's going
to go in the four direction if Delta G
is negative all right now let's increase
the volume and think about what happens
in the container so we have a container
here we increase the volume so now we're
going to shift the reaction toward our
reactants so the increase in volume is
going to lower that total pressure and
we can think about this switch we have
one molecule of P 4 on on the products
two molecules of P 2 here so for every
one molecule consumed in the backward
direction two molecules of P 2 are
formed so the shift then will the shift
will compensate for this change and
we're going to increase the total
pressure which was decreased before by
this increase in volume so again you're
shifting it in such a way to minimize
the stress even if the stress is a
decrease in pressure you want to be back
at your equilibrium place so you'll
shift to then increase the pressure the
total pressure when just to compensate
in any way minimize the stress whatever
the stress is you want to minimize it
all right let's do something slightly
trickier let's add an inert gas to this
reaction so we're gonna add an inert gas
to a container increasing the total
pressure at constant temperature
why don't you predict what's going to
happen
all right ten more seconds
yes this is a tricky one since it's a
clicker competition we won't repol we
will put up the answer by a slight edge
so this seems very counterintuitive so
let's discuss it so nothing happens but
why so Q depends on the partial pressure
of these gases and under the scenario
described here the partial pressures
were actually not changing so Q was not
changing and therefore there was no
shift so to understand this we have to
do a little partial pressure review so
partial pressure of gases the partial
pressure is the pressure that each gas
would exert if it were by itself that's
the definition of partial pressure so if
we have oxygen at one atmosphere and
nitrogen at one atmosphere and you add
them together and now you have a total
pressure of two atmospheres one plus one
equals two but the partial pressure of
o2 here is identical to the two it's
partial pressure here it's partial
pressure as if it was there by itself it
has no interest in this inert gas it
ignores it and feels no different as a
result of it very just sort of isolation
list with these ideal gases so the
partial pressure of o2 here is the same
and so we can look mathematically at
this expression so the partial pressure
of gas a is equal to the number of moles
of that gas RT over volume the total
pressure is equal to the partial
pressure of gas ABC how many ever gases
there are but the partial pressure of
each gas like Oh to hear just depends on
the number of moles of that gas and the
volume of that container assuming
constant temperature so if the partial
pressure isn't going to change so if you
add inert gases increasing the total
pressure the
partial pressure is unchanged and when
the partial pressure is unchanged hue is
unchanged remember Q equals the partial
pressure of the gas products over the
partial pressure of the gas reactants so
if partial pressures don't change Q does
not change and if hue doesn't change
then Q is the same as K and there is no
shift so we have to always ask ourselves
what's happened to the container what's
the partial pressure did the partial
pressure change all right let's try
another example let's add another inert
gas but this time we're gonna add it to
a container and the total pressure and
the and the temperature are kept
constant in this case so this is another
clicker question why don't you see what
you think is going to happen here
all right let's do 10 more seconds
all right this is a good clicker day
sometimes you know whenever the answers
are all 90% then then it's decided that
this this will these questions will
determine it all right so let's let's
look at this so we're gonna shift toward
reactant again let's consider Y all
right so in this problem we're adding an
inert gas total pressure and temperature
are constant well temperature was
constant before but total pressure
wasn't in the last example so let's go
back to our picture here so if the total
pressure was to stay constant and
normally if you add one atmosphere of o2
one atmosphere of n2 the total pressure
is 2 atmospheres because total pressure
equals partial pressure of one gas plus
the partial pressure of the other gas so
if the total pressure is constant what
happened to happen tell me where
so the volume must have changed so if
the temperature stayed the same the
volume of the container must have
increased because otherwise the part of
the pressure the total pressure should
have changed and it didn't so the system
was manipulated the volume must have
increased so now let's think about what
happens when the volume increases when
the volume increases the partial
pressures decrease and and because
they're now in a bigger volume because
partial pressure depends a number of
moles it depends on volume at constant
temperature and so if the partial
pressures decrease then Q is also going
to change and when Q changes the
reaction is going to respond and in this
way it's going to respond in such a way
that you want to increase the pressure
because we have this decrease so now we
want to increase and so we're going to
switch from one mole to two and so the
reaction is going to shift toward the
reactants so in doing these problems
with with partial pressures and gases
you always have to ask yourself do Q
change and whether Q changed it's
whether the partial pressures change and
partial pressure will definitely change
if you change moles or if you change the
volume so often in these problems are
saying did the volume change volume
change partial pressure change Q is
different the reaction is going to shift
so there's lots of examples on this in
problem set 6 so you can uh you can go
work on those alright so that is about
volume we've had temperature constant
can't do that forever now it's time to
change the temperature
all right so changing the temperature of
an equilibrium mixture by adding Heat is
going to shift the reaction in such a
way that some of that heat is absorbed
so again this is consistent with lishala
a minimize the stress add Heat absorb
heat remove heat
more he again you're minimizing the
stress to the system so now let's think
of different types of reactions we have
endothermic and exothermic reactions and
let's think about the effect of changing
the temperature on those reactions so
let's think about raising the
temperature of an exothermic reaction is
that going to shift to formation of
reactants or products what do you think
reactors all right let's consider why so
for an exothermic reaction that means
that the reaction in the forward
direction is exothermic which also means
that the reaction in the reverse
direction is endothermic so for an
exothermic reaction exothermic in the
forward direction heat is produced when
you go from reactants to products and in
the endothermic direction heat is
absorbed so if you raise the temperature
you're gonna want to minimize the stress
so you want to shift it in the
endothermic direction you want to shift
it in the direction that heat is
absorbed which in this case is toward
reactants now let's think about an
endothermic reaction raising the
temperature of an endothermic reaction
is going to shift toward products and if
we put our pictures again an endothermic
reaction is endothermic in the forward
direction so heat is absorbed from
reactants to products and in the reverse
direction of an endothermic reaction is
the exothermic direction in which heat
is produced so if you raise the
temperature then you're gonna want to
shift in such a direction to minimize
that stress in a direction to absorb
heat which in this case sends you toward
products so here the predictive tool is
our friend Delta H so Delta H tells us
whether reactions are exothermic or
endothermic whether Delta H is negative
or positive so for some things the
predictive the prediction is what's
happening to Delta G here our protective
tool is the sign of Delta H
so let's do a clicker question and tell
me what direction you think this
particular reaction is going to go if
you add Heat all right ten more seconds
all right so is this an EXO or
endothermic reaction exothermic then we
can think about what's gonna happen so
you add Heat
you're gonna want to shift it in the
direction to absorb the heat so you're
gonna shift it toward reactants in the
endothermic direction absorb the heat so
we can Delta H is the predictive tool
you have to remember negative Delta H
exothermic positive Delta H endothermic
and then just think about shifting to
minimize the stress always minimizing
the stress all right so our equilibrium
constant K it's a constant except that
it changes with temperature so the
equilibrium constant has a temperature
dependence so big K the equilibrium
constant can change with temperature
reaction rates can also change with
temperature so when we talk about
kinetics we're gonna have little k's
which are reaction rates and they're
going to change with temperature as well
so how does the equilibrium constant
change with temperature and you might
feel a derivation coming on and you
would be right so let's think about what
we know equations that involve the
equilibrium constant we saw before that
Delta G nought equals minus RT natural
log of K what else do we know about
Delta G naught equations what else does
Delta G not equal equals our friend
Delta H naught minus T Delta s naught
and we can rearrange this expression
solving for the natural log of K and if
we assume and it's a good assumption
that Delta H and Delta s naught are
independent of temperature that means
that K is going to change with
temperature and we can think about two
different temperatures and come up with
a unified equation
so if we consider a reaction carried out
a temperature t1 and temperature t2 we
would have natural log of k2 equals
minus Delta H naught over R and over
temperature 2 plus Delta s over R and we
have the same thing now but for
equilibrium constant 1 and temperature 1
so we can combine these and things will
cancel so subtracting those two
equations gives you this and it's a
named equation in chemistry which means
that it's probably pretty important
because a lot of things don't have names
so we have the natural log of the
equilibrium constant k2 over equilibrium
constant k1 equals minus Delta H naught
over R got over R which is a constant in
brackets 1 over temperature 2 minus 1
over temperature 1 van't hoff equation
and later in the semester I'm going to
ask you to recall this equation and I'll
have a special prize for the first
person who comes up with the vant Hoff
equation so you can keep that in mind
I think it's lecture 34 so we have a
ways to go all right so let's think
about what is true then if Delta H
naught is less than 0 first of all is
that exothermic or endothermic all right
so now we're going to think about
increasing the temperature of an
exothermic reaction so temperature 2 is
going to be greater than temperature 1
and we already thought about what was
gonna happen but let's make sure this
equation is valid and works for what we
just saw so if we increase the
temperature here what's true about this
equation well what's true is you have a
minus sign here Delta H is negative for
exothermic and if your temperature 2 is
greater than temperature 1 that's also a
negative so overall you're going to have
a negative value and if you have a
negative value here that's gonna mean
that k1 is greater than k2 which means
that at your new equilibrium there'll be
fewer products all right
this works with what we were just
talking about if you increase the
temperature of an exothermic reaction it
shifts it toward reactants to absorb the
heat so there would be less products at
that new we've shifted toward reactants
so you can think about this this you can
just think about what's happening and
moving in the direction to minimize the
stress and you can also look at the
equation to mathematically figure out
what's going to be true about the
equilibrium constants it's great to have
a back-up plan all right so if we
decrease the temperature t2 is less than
t1 so now we still have we have our - we
have a minus but now this is a plus term
and so that's gonna mean our k1 is less
than k2 we have more products here so if
we decrease the temperature of an
exothermic reaction reaction responds in
such a way to minimize the stress add
more heat so you switch to the
exothermic direction and so you should
have more products at this new this new
equilibrium alright so now why don't you
tell me what should happen for the
scenario where Delta H naught is greater
than zero which of the following should
be true
all right ten more seconds
yeah so most people are right in that
yeah it alters I think this is a good
example of how when things are expressed
different ways sometimes it's hard to
see that it all is consistent with each
other so yeah all of those turn out to
be true all right so let's look at it
over here so this is an endothermic
reaction when we increase the
temperature of an endothermic reaction
you still have this minus sign but now
this is plus but when we've increased
the temperature this is minus you get an
overall plus + signs which means that k1
is less than k2 increasing the
temperature of an endothermic direct
reaction shifts it toward products if we
decrease the temperature the net sign is
negative here so k1 is going to be
greater than k2 we decrease the
temperature it shifts in the exothermic
backwards direction and we have less
products all right so K changes with
temperature you can see this equation on
your equation sheet or just think about
minimizing the stress so what is this
useful for well figuring out how to
maximize the yield of a reaction can be
very important in industry one process
that is an important industrial process
is the hover Bosch process where you
take nitrogen gas and hydrogen gas and
make ammonia this process which was
developed a long time ago is still used
today and each year you make one point
six times ten to the tenth kilograms of
ammonia which used for fertilizer and
other things do you know what other
things ammonia is often used for besides
fertilizer explosives yeah so if you
kind of
look at the dates of these process
development and the names of these
people they're German and so we have you
know World War one and World War two I'm
thinking that the push to come up with
this process was probably not for for
fertilizer in the farmers at this time
this was an important part of the war
effort to get this process to work to
make explosives so Harbor over here also
is considered the father of chemical
weapons he came up with gases such as
phosgene and he would study the effects
of how they killed people
and one of the kind of ironies is that
he was Jewish and so a lot of his
discoveries were used and resulted in
his relatives dying but so he he was he
an interesting figure in history Carl
Bosch on the other hand disapproved
strongly of Hitler and was fired from
his post he didn't lose his life but his
career was ended but he still had his
Nobel Prize so maybe it was okay so this
this is an interesting a little history
about chemistry but this process is
still used now no one has come up with
anything better and it's and we could
think about what are the challenges of
making this this reaction go
so it's an exothermic reaction so what
temperature would you would you want to
use to get more products
right you want to use low temperature
because that would favor your products
but low temperature is also sometimes
not great because it slows the rate
which is bad so the compromise
temperature that's used in this process
is 500 degrees Celsius so it's pretty
hot so this works again maximizing the
yield of products so what are other ways
to drive this toward products so can
someone suggest another another way
is this yeah you could decrease the
volume yep yes yeah
there's a couple things that you can do
one is you're right you compress the
volume and the reason why this works is
that if you note you have four molecules
over here one plus three going to two so
if you compress that volume down you're
going to shift it toward the fewer
number of molecules which is two so that
shifts it toward products the other
thing that they do is they actually
remove products from the reaction so
they liquefy out the product at some
point and when you remove the product
that also shifts the reaction toward
more products to minimize the stress so
these are two of the things that are
done so this creates you have a lot of
you have to have high pressure to
compress that volume down and high
temperatures so this process costs a lot
of energy so this we we spend a lot of
energy in this country doing this
reaction and the reason why is because
nitrogen is really hard to split
nitrogen so what kind of bond does
nitrogen have and to have triple bond
right it's very hard as a high bond or
it's very hard to break that bond and so
you really have to work at breaking it
so if you're and if you're doing
industry there's lots of nitrogen in the
air so a lot of it is available but it's
just very hard to utilize it to fix that
nitrogen into another form so lots about
nitrogen in the air nitrogen is needed
by all living things but it's really
hard to break that triple bond but if
you're a bacteria you have a much easier
time doing this than if you are a person
and bacteria have an enzyme called
nitrogen ace the adding the ACE means
it's an enzyme so this is an enzyme that
works on nitrogen most people call it a
nitrogenous but it's really nitrogen ace
and it splits nitrogen and it does this
by these really complex metallo
cofactors lots of metals in here you
have iron and molybdenum
you also have inorganic sulfur and it's
those d-orbitals that let you do this so
you know you can use high temperatures
high pressure or you can get them
transition metal with beautiful D
orbitals to do your work for you and a
lot of people are trying to come up with
their own catalysts inspired by nature
to get this to work so this is an
ongoing area of research and I just want
to mention one of the leaders in the
field this is a husband-and-wife team
actually and Markus ribby is a German
with a very heavy German accent and so
Germans have been dominating this
nitrogen flexing field for a very long
time but Marcus ribby is like the nicest
person you would ever meet in your
entire life and he's trying to figure
out environmentally friendly ways to do
it so again chemistry is a powerful tool
to change the world but let's change it
for the better please and try to come up
with ways to protect our environment all
right so there's one application of
lasat Luise principle maximizing the
yield of a reaction another example
comes in medicine and lasat Lia's
principle with respect to another
metalloprotein which is hemoglobin so
hemoglobin has a heme which has iron
more d orbital's you can tell how if you
have this excited now wait till I get to
D orbitals it's very exciting I can't
wait I love I love transition metals so
anyway so we have hemoglobin so
hemoglobin HB plus oxygen yields
oxyhemoglobin that's hemoglobin with
oxygen bound and this is an incredibly
important reaction because otherwise
your air your o2 would be in your lungs
and wouldn't leave but hemoglobin
carries it to the body where it can be
used to make energy so we really need
the reaction we want to maximize the
product of that reaction so this
equilibrium can be shifted if you have
less co2 around a lower partial pressure
of o2 and this can happen as you go up
in altitude the partial the pressure of
oxygen decreases and that's a real
problem so how many of you any of you
like real serious mountain climbers
at least one how about like somewhat
serious climbed amount may be worried
about your hemoglobin levels altitude
sickness a few okay so what can happen
here is when you have again lower
pressure then the reaction shifts in the
opposite direction it's like you have a
lower amount of reactant so you shift to
make more reactant and this is what
happens you have less oxygenated
hemoglobin and that can make you pretty
sick so for some of them if you want to
say what what can you do about this how
can you shift the reaction back the
other way do you know what your body
does your body's very clever what does
it do yeah it makes more hemoglobin so
that's why you need to give your body a
little time to adjust I can't do it
immediately you have to give it a little
time to make more protein but when you
increase the amount of reactant it'll
shift toward products so when you
increase the reactants to minimize the
stress it shifts to make more products
so this is a this is how the body
compensates so I I wanted to tell you
I'm gonna tell you very briefly about
significant figures and then I'm gonna
have time to show you a mold a video and
it's actually from UC Irvine with Mart
where Marcus Ruby is from so today we're
celebrating UC Irvine chemistry
department anyway I just want to mention
significant figures I have a confession
to make I didn't know the rules of
significant figures for logs when I
started teaching this course and this
will be information that I think now I
have to you know purge from my my brain
on my deathbed but pay attention to
these and we'll have some clicker
questions on them so that'll be fun okay
so let's look at these two log of two
different numbers note the three here is
the three over here the 23 10 to the 23
10 to the 23 mole day is the 23
here but these those are not significant
that three and that twenty-three are not
significant figures these are the
significant figures seven point three
one zero so there are four significant
figures here those four significant
figures end up after the decimal point
so those are the significant figures
after the decimal point and if you go
the other direction if you have a point
three eight nine here that has three
significant figures so three significant
figures here but if you have twelve
point three eight nine you still have
three significant figures because that
twelve ends up over here all right with
that give it a try
this could be for the clicker
championship of today
alright let's just do 10 more seconds
should I show my video first or do you
want to do the winner first right okay
so three after the decimal place and
let's look at the winner and then we're
going to end with a short video oh man
all right Dan whoa okay all right so
we're going to end with a short video
and here it is
snow looks white because it's scattering
light elastically atoms are everywhere I
look none of them can be seen molecules
have always been a challenge tears are
hard like microscopes or heaven knows we
trap
do they exist - maybe team may be using
some spectroscopy for centuries we did
can snow chemists know what makes water
freezing flow snow
2:23 some others never bothered me
anyway actions measured distance
nomenclature hard to say though we are
Makris got a big we
we love to see what we can do
synthesizing novel molecules from
exclusion principle the poly Cassie
this chemistry
never bothered me anyway right have a
great weekend please return any borrowed
clickers
you